hello and welcome to another one of my
videos this one shows you how to make an
egg timer well it doesn't sound very
exciting it does pose a few challenges
well first of all stuff that I'm using
as you would recognize do we know in our
board and also an LCD keypad shield this
particular shield offers you a parallel
interface LCD and it's connected in
4-bit mode it's an hd44780 compatible
and it has some buttons here five of
which to control and one for reset now i
modified this shield slightly because
what I wanted was an egg timer and it
has to be with you so what i did was i
sold it appears i speaker to pin 13 and
ground and super glued it to the bottom
so now i've got a little deeper which
could be pitching now the inspiration
for this timer came from my brother
because he does quite a bit of training
athletic training at home and he needed
a device which can time him for a
certain interval and repeatedly do so
and alert him when it gets that
particular time so he's been nagging me
for a little while to solve this problem
of his and this is one of the ways you
can with an Arduino I'll just plug it in
in coincidence with little bird
electronics today publishing on the
posterous blog about the milli second
function I've decided to employ the
millisecond function part of the problem
with the Arduino is timing now you'll
notice that I'm not using a real time
clock if you wanted really really good
timing what you'll do is you use a real
time clock module which gives you the
present time and date and keeps it quite
accurately instead what we will be using
is the microcontrollers on board free
running time running away which relies
on a little crystal or in this case on
the uno board this particular board has
a ceramic resonator so that's it there
which I'm pointing at this particular
clone board has dual footprint
which allows you to install a crystal
and its capacities but this one has a
resonator the problem of the resonator
is low accuracy compared to a crystal so
you're looking at point one percent
drift in terms of frequency and it could
be worse depending on the temperature so
in terms of timing accuracy it's not as
accurate as if you had a real time clock
so LCD buzzer and some code later which
I cut it up today let me hook this up
and we have a timer so the problem is if
you choose to use the delay function on
the Arduino the delay function delays
for a certain amount of time but you
don't know what the other statements
which are executed say in the loop you
don't know what amount of time is used
in that particular or those particular
statements so therefore if you just use
delay it's not a very accurate timing
mechanism so as you can see well maybe
not hopefully it says time up so let's
just set a time so this one decrements
minutes this one increments minutes and
this one increment seconds so there's a
slight button balance issue there but
anyway let's start timing for five
seconds five four three two one and it
says time up and if you want to repeat
the interval press the button again five
four three two and there you go you've
got an egg timer and I've tested the
accuracy of this we're looking at about
maybe three to four seconds of drift in
every hour which is not spectacular but
given that i haven't had to invest in a
real-time clock module is rather
acceptable out of a crystal oh sorry out
of a ceramic resonator if this had a
crystal on board which the old de milla
novi is due and some of the Arduino
clones do then you can expect much
better timing tolerance